So our text is about being quick to listen, so we'd like to develop the theme listen with mildness
We'll talk about two points. Why is mildness essential for listening and how can mildness help us to be a better listener?
Let's take that first point. How is mildness connected with listening?
Let's turn in our Bibles to our text James chapter 1 and we'll read verses 19 through 21
Because James makes the connection for us
James chapter 1 verse 19
Does know this my beloved brothers everyone must be quick to listen slow to speak slow to anger
For man's anger does not bring about God's righteousness
Therefore put away all filthiness in every trace of badness
And except with mildness the implanting of the word which is able to save you
So here James is talking about listening to God's word and he says we need to be quick to listen
That means we have to control our reaction
We have to be slow to speak because when we start to speak we stop listening
And we also have to control our emotions because if we get angry
That's not going to work out God's righteousness will likely make matters worse
Instead the key is what he mentioned in verse 21
We need to have mildness that's going to help us accept
God's word to to listen to it quickly and accept it
And why is that the case?
Well mildness involves self-control a person who is mild tempered is humble and their patient
They have a calm and calm and peaceful disposition
The scriptures describe a mild tempered person as teachable
Somebody who is willing and ready to submit to God's will
So mildness is essential if we're to listen to God's word
And doesn't that explain why so many people today are not quick to listen to what the Bible says
The insight volume makes this statement
It's as lack of mildness of temper is the result of insecurity
frustration
Lack of faith and hope and even desperation
And doesn't that describe the world that we live in today
Satan's got people so emotionally wound up that they're not mild tempered
He's got them feeling insecure
They feel threatened and afraid of being taken advantage of
And for that reason they're not open to any agreement. They don't trust other people
Satan's got people feeling frustrated
Life in this system is unfair and unjust
And that hardens people making them resentful and bitter
And the institutions in this system of things have robbed people of their faith and their hope
And it's no wonder that people are skeptical and suspicious
And all of that has left people feeling in despair, distressed and anxious
And Satan likes it that way
He wants people to not be mild tempered because he knows
If they're not mild tempered, they won't be quick to listen to God's word
Yet with Jehovah's help, anyone can gradually develop a mild temper
With Jehovah's word and his spirit, he gives us the
The reason and the ability to do so
He gives us the ability to control our reaction
And through his word, he gives us the reasons to feel secure
To feel calm, to have strong faith and hope
And as a result, we can trust him
We don't have to take matters in our own hands
So, mildness is essential to listening to God's word
It's the quality that loosens the soil of our heart
Then allows God's word to be implanted there
But mildness can also help us become a better listener
And to see that we have only to look at the wonderful example of Jesus
Jesus was mild tempered and as a result, he was approachable
He created opportunities for him to listen to other people
Turn, if you will, in your Bible to Matthew chapter 11
We'll read verses 28 and 29
And notice this warm appeal by Jesus
Matthew 28 or Matthew 11 verses 28 and 29
He says, Come to me, all you who are toiling and loaded down
And I will refresh you
Take my yoke upon you and learn from me
Fry mild tempered and lowly in heart
And you will find refreshment for yourselves
Yes, Jesus was mild tempered and that made him approachable
People found it easy to talk to Jesus
They never wondered what kind of mood Jesus was going to be in that day
Jesus wasn't touchy or thin skinned or moody
People didn't fear his reaction
They sensed that Jesus really wanted to listen to them
So consider some examples of that
Martha felt free to approach Jesus to vent her frustration and complain about her sister Mary
Both Mary and Martha felt safe venting their emotions to Jesus when Lazarus died
And remember the first words they said to him
It could have sounded insensitive
If you had only been here my brother would not have died
Recall the occasion when James and John asked Jesus for special favors
Now they did that just shortly after Jesus said that he would suffer and die
And although Peter was misguided
He felt comfortable pulling Jesus aside to offer him some counsel
What's the point people felt free talking to Jesus
To ask for things to express their emotions to voice their concerns
And even though what they said may have seemed petty, insensitive, misguided or even wrong
Jesus never overreacted
He always dignified them dealt with them in a mild way
Even when he had to give them strong reproof or counsel
And what's amazing is that Jesus likely often knew what people were going to say
And yet he never finished their sentences he never interrupted them
He dignified them he let them express themselves
And what a good lesson for us
If we're mild tempered that'll help us to become approachable
Creating opportunities for us to be quick to listen to other people
And unlike Jesus we need to listen to what other people say
That's the only way that we'll know how we can help them
And it's the only way that will remain approachable so that we may receive the counsel and suggestions that we may need
Now a second way that Jesus set an example in mildness
Is he didn't overreact to what he heard
Why was that?
Well turn in your Bibles please to 1 Peter chapter 2 and verse 23
And note this statement
You're regarding Jesus 1 Peter
2 23
It says when he was being insulted he did not insult in return
When he was suffering he did not threaten
But he entrusted himself to the one who judges righteously
Yes, Jesus kept himself under control because he entrusted himself
To Jehovah he knew that Jehovah would deal with all the injustices that he faced
Jesus knew that there was nothing that anybody could say to him or about him
That would change how Jehovah felt about him
And that made Jesus feel secure
He didn't lose focus
He didn't take matters into his own hands
He didn't overreact
Now meditating on Jesus example can help us
It can help us when we face
insulting comments from opposers or malicious statements by
Opposers
But it can also help us deal with day-to-day conversations
You know sometimes somebody may say something that shows
That they've misunderstood us or maybe misjudged us
Or maybe they phrase something in a way
That sounds like they're challenging our authority
Or maybe they make a joke at our expense
All of those things can make us feel insecure and frustrated
But if we have mildness rooted in a relationship with Jehovah
We'll stay calm and secure
We won't lose our focus
We won't overreact
Yes, mildness is essential for listening
If it will help us to be quick to listen
To God's words so that it can be implanted in our hearts
And it'll help us to be better listeners
By helping us to become approachable
And not overreacting to what we hear